# 9770


Toward the end of summer, Fina was pretty confident in reading 
cvc & cvce words, blends, a handful of sight words, and basic digraphs.

She’s probably ready to start working with vowel digraphs, r-controlled vowels, and onward.
  
With some guidance and support on focus, she could get through 6-7 pages, with each page containing sentence groups such as: 
 
“Was it a big flock of gulls?”, asked mom.  “Oh, it was big.  It was very, very big”, said Scott.  “We flew on and on, over the water”. 




====

A digraph is two letters that combine together to correspond to one sound (phoneme). Examples of consonant digraphs are ‘ch, sh, th, ng’.  Examples of vowel digraphs are ‘ea, oa, oe, ie, ue, ar, er, ir, or, ur ‘.
If we think about consonant digraphs first we see that the phoneme /ng/ is initially taught as corresponding to the digraph (two letters) ‘ng’ in words such as ‘bang, sang, king, ring, wing, long, song, string, going, looking’.
But how do children identify digraphs and their corresponding phonemes when they are seen in other words like ‘bingo, mango, bongo, fungus, fungal, angle, triangle, angry, hungry, kangaroo, ingot, angel, language’? Do they try to say the same sound as in ‘bang, wing’?
It turns out that if the word has more than one syllable, and the ‘ng’ spelling is at the syllable boundary, then ‘n’ is in one syllable and ‘g’ is in the other syllable (man-go, bin-go, bon-go, fun-gus, fun-gal, an-gle, tri-an-gle, an-gry, hun-gry, kan-ga-roo, in-got, an-gel, lan-guage). So the consecutive letters do not represent the single phoneme /ng/. They do not represent a digraph.
If we consider some common vowel digraphs and look at words containing them, we see the same thing happens in these written words also.
The vowel digraphs ‘oa, ea, oe, ie, ue’ can be seen in the words ‘road, eat, toe, pie, blue’. However, the multi-syllable words ‘oasis, create, poet, diet, duet’, (pronounced ‘o-a-sis, cre-ate, po-et, di-et, du-et) also contain the same letters in the same order. In these words the letters do not form a digraph to represent a single phoneme
The digraphs ‘ar, er, ir, or, ur’ can be seen in the words ‘farm, herd, girl, fork, burn’ and the same letters in the same order can be seen in the two syllable words ‘garage, very, pirate, orange, bury’. These words are split into syllables as follows, ga-rage, ve-ry, pi-rate, o-range, bu-ry’ where the vowel is in the first syllable and the ‘r’ in the second. Here the consecutive letters do not form a digraph either. **
There are split digraphs ‘a-e, e-e, i-e, o-e’ occurring in words like ‘cave, these, like, home’. These same letter combinations can be seen in the two syllable words ‘camel, panel, seven, given, rivet, honest, oven’. The letters ‘a, e, i, o’ are pronounced as short vowels in the first syllable and the letter ‘e’ is pronounced in the second syllable as follows, ‘cam-el, pan-el, sev-en, giv-en, riv-et, hon-est, ov-en’.
Then there are the digraphs ‘oo, oi, aw, ew, ow, sh’ in the words ‘moon, boil, saw, new, down, ship’. The same consecutive letter combinations occur in the multi-syllable words ‘cooperate, going, aware, reward, towards, mishap’, but they do not represent single phonemes in these words. #
It is the syllable structure of the word that determines how the consecutive letters are pronounced. For children who have been taught to recognise digraphs as spelling of phonemes, what do they say when they see consecutive letters in multi-syllabic words, where the letters do not represent digraphs of single phonemes?
Children are taught about digraphs in phonics lessons in the Reception Year and Year 1 (aged 4, 5 and 6) in schools in England. There is an appendix of these digraphs in the National Curriculum to be taught as specific spellings of words in Year 1. There is a phonics screening check at the end of Year 1 to make sure that children know them. The digraphs in the check include ‘ai, ay, a-e, ee, ea, e-e, ie, i-e, oa, o-e, oo, ue, ew, u-e, ou, ow, ar, er, ir, or, ur, oi, oy, sh, ch, th, ng’.


