# zine: feed into chat

Aquinas holds that will can be ascribed to God essentially, and not just because God has chosen to produce certain things, because of what he takes will  in general to be. In the case of what has intellect, he thinks, will is a tending  to a perceived good and a delight in such a good when it is obtained. Since  Aquinas takes God essentially to know what is perfectly good (i.e., God), he  quickly concludes (1a,19,1) that there is will in God.  You should notice that in presenting this argument Aquinas is understanding will and knowledge of what is good to be more connected than some  people do. It is sometimes said that one can #rst know what is good and then  decide whether or not to seek goodness one knows—as if the judgments “X is  good” and “X is desirable” were quite separate from each other. In Aquinas’s  view, however, to judge that X is good is always somehow to desire (will) X. He  thinks that we always at some level will or desire what we take to be good. 

Since we are fallible, Aquinas concedes that we might often desire what is not  really good. In God’s case, however, Aquinas holds that there is no room for  intellectual error. So he thinks that God infallibly and essentially knows the  perfect good that God is, and therefore desires (wills) it with nothing to  impede God embracing and delighting in it.  It remains true, though, that Aquinas does think that will can be ascribed to  God because of what God has brought about. Aquinas thinks that there is goodness in everything produced by God simply insofar as it exists (cf. 1a,5,3). This  goodness, Aquinas argues in 1a,19,2, is willed by God and re'ects the goodness of God who is, therefore, willing the goodness that is God when willing  the goodness of what is not God. This conclusion might seem to suggest that  God has to will or produce what is not divine just because, as it exists, it re'ects  the goodness that God is. In 1a,19,3, however, Aquinas insists that God does  not have to will all that God wills. He agrees that God cannot but will the absolute good that God is, but he goes on to say that there are things God has willed  or produced that do not have to exist, absolutely speaking, and that are therefore not willed by God of necessity. Yes, Aquinas agrees, in tending to their  good, creatures are tending to goodness as it exists in God, and God is, therefore, willing the divine goodness when willing the goodness of creatures. And  yes, Aquinas also agrees, if it is true that God does will something that is not  divine, it follows that God, being immutable, cannot not will the something in  question. But God, Aquinas argues, does not have to will the good of what is  not God in order to will the perfect good that God is, just as we do not have to  will to take a train to get to a desired destination that we can equally well arrive  at by means of a bus or a taxi cab. In this connection, Aquinas draws on the  distinction (already invoked in 1a,14,13) between “Necessarily if p, then p” and  “If p, then p is necessarily true.” He reasons that while it is necessarily true that  if God wills such and such, then God wills such and such, it does not follow  that if God wills such and such, then such and such is absolutely necessary.  The distinction that Aquinas has in mind here is clearly a valid one since, for  example, as Aquinas says in 1a,19,3, while “It is necessarily true that if Socrates  is sitting, then Socrates is sitting” cannot be denied, it does not follow that if  Socrates is sitting then Socrates is sitting of necessity.  Still, Aquinas thinks, God’s will does cause what is not divine. In 1a,19,4,  he brie'y defends this conclusion (a) by repeating a version of the #fth of the  Five Ways, (b) by arguing that God’s nature, as pure being, is not the nature of  a cause whose e"ects have to be like this as opposed to like that as, say, the  e"ects of something belonging to a natural kind have to re'ect its nature as a  thing of the kind it is rather than of some other, and (c) by suggesting that  what is produced by God proceeds from God as willing—God as an agent 

cause being just God as willing. And these lines of argument lead Aquinas in  1a,19,5 to deny that God’s willing is caused by what is not God. One might produce X because one has a motive for doing so. But Aquinas denies that any  creature can causally act on God so as to make God will anything. Relatedly,  Aquinas also denies that anything can interfere with God’s will so as to frustrate it (1a,19,6).  Aquinas’s main line of argument here rests on positions that he has already defended in the Summa Theologiae when speaking of God as accounting  for the esse (existence) of creatures. However, he has an unusually long reply  (by Summa Theologiae standards) to one of the objections in 1a,19,6.  In 1 Timothy 2:4 St. Paul says that God wills everyone to be saved. You  might think (Aquinas did) that not everyone is saved, that not everyone ends  up with the beati#c vision. So what sense can be made of what St. Paul says,  if it is true (as Aquinas thinks) that God’s will is inevitably ful#lled? Aquinas  suggests that St. Paul’s statement can be understood in three senses: (1)  “God wills all those who are saved to be saved”; (2) “God wills people from  every class to be saved”; (3) “God wills all to be saved antecedently, but not  consequently.”  Although he draws on St. Augustine and John Damascene while noting (1)  and (2) here as possible readings of the Pauline text, Aquinas is much more  taken with (3) as a way of reading it. He elaborates on (3) by noting the case of  a judge who might condemn someone to death while not actually wanting  anyone to su"er the death penalty.9 A judge might say, “Obviously, I want all  people to be well behaved, to never be convicted of crimes, and never to end  up being condemned to death,” yet the same judge might pronounce a death  sentence. So says Aquinas: “We can speak of a justice that antecedently wishes  every human being to live but consequently pronounces the capital sentence.  By analogy, therefore, God antecedently wills all people to be saved, yet consequently wills some to be damned as God’s justice requires.”10  The obvious objection to this line of argument is that if, as Aquinas maintains, God is the cause of the existence of all creatures, then God is responsible for creatures being what they are and as such has no business  condemning or punishing them. Judges in courts do not account for the  being of the people who come up before them and can excuse themselves  for condemning people found to be guilty. Can God be excused in this way,  however? Though he does not say so in 1a,19,6, his response (as we shall see  from what he says in 1a,19,8) would be (a) that God creates people as free in  the context of the existing universe, (b) that people who freely choose wrong  are people accountable for their actions, and (c) that God is no more unjust  than a human judge in treating people with respect to the choices they have 
made, even though all that is real in them derives from God’s causality as the  source of the esse (existence) of things.  But is the causality of God that of a cause with a will that undergoes  change? Let us assume that you and I are individuals who can act for reasons  and do not always behave because of a physical constitution that compels us  to go through various motions. Let us say that we act willingly or freely. It still  remains that our will can be thought of as changeable in that we can change  our minds. Today I might book a Caribbean cruise, while tomorrow I might  decide to cancel the booking. So is being changeable in this sense an aspect  of God’s will?  One might think that it is, because of biblical texts that speak of God regretting having done something.11 Or one might think of God’s will as changeable  in that God #rst commands this while then requiring something di"erent.  One might also think that God’s will is changeable since God does not will  what God wills of necessity and must, therefore, be open to change. But Aquinas rejects these lines of argument. If God is immutable, he reasons, then  God’s will, which is not something di"erent from God, is immutable. God  may, Aquinas agrees, will di"erent changes to occur. This, however, does not  entail that God’s will undergoes change, and biblical language suggesting otherwise has to be construed as being metaphorical.  If God wills a change to come about, however, must it not follow that God’s  will imposes necessity on what God wills? If God wills that such and such  comes about, does it not have to come about? Aquinas thinks that the answer  to this question is no, because he thinks that God can will into existence both  things that do not have to be as they are and things that have to be as they are  (1a,19,8). His argument is: (1) Some things that come about are things that do  not have to come about (free human choices, for instance); (2) Some things  come about inevitably because they are the e"ects of things in the world  whose e"ects are necessitated by their causes (I take it that Aquinas is here  thinking of examples such as skin burning because acid has been poured on  it or milk boiling when left over heat for too long); (3) God’s willing extends to  the production both of what comes about without having to do so and to what  comes about while having to do so.12  Aquinas’s reasoning here is that what we might think of as coming about  contingently (non-necessarily) is not something that comes about contingently in spite of God but because of God—that the contingent/necessary distinction as we apply it to events in the world positively depends on God willing  there to be this distinction when it comes to events in the world. As Aquinas  writes: “Since God’s will is the most e"ective of all causes, those things come  about which God wills, and they also come about in the manner that God wills 

thomas aquinas’s summa theologiae  them to....The reason why e"ects willed by God come about contingently is  not because their proximate causes are contingent, but because God has prepared contingent causes for them because God willed that they come about  contingently.”13 Yes, thinks Aquinas, all of God’s e"ects are willed by God and  nothing can hinder God’s will from taking e"ect, but not all of God’s e"ects  are things that are, absolutely speaking, inevitable.14 Here Aquinas is evidently  thinking of “necessary” and “contingent” as signifying di"erent ways of being  had by di"erent things, all of which are God’s e"ects.  Yet is evil not one of God’s e"ects? And if it is, should we not conclude that  God wills evil? In 1a,19,9, Aquinas argues that God does not will evil directly  since God’s willing is primarily a matter of God willing (desiring) what is  good. That things fall short of being as good as we might like them to be  seems obvious, but Aquinas does not take this to mean that God wills evil as  such and directly anymore than he thinks that we can desire what we take to  be evil. Aquinas does think that evil can be thought of as willed by God indirectly insofar as God wills certain goods that depend on it rather as we might  will to undergo certain painful medical treatments for the sake of our health.  Yet Aquinas #nds it absurd to suppose that God could ever directly will evil  (for its own sake, as it were). As we shall see, this line of thinking is later pursued by Aquinas in 1a,48 and 49, in which he considers what evil should be  thought to be and how God can be related to it causally.  1a,19,10–12 does not add much to what Aquinas has already said about  God’s will in 1a,19. In 1a,19,10, Aquinas argues that freedom of choice can be  ascribed to God since, though God wills the goodness that God is of necessity,  God does not have to will to produce things that are not divine (cf. 1a,19,3).  1a,19,11 and 12 are asking whether one can think of us having “signs” of God’s  will as one might think of di"erent things that people do as indicating what  their willing in general amounts to. With some subtle quali#cations, Aquinas  answers that we can think of ourselves as having signs of God’s will as long as  we bear in mind what has already been said in the Summa Theologiae, especially with regard to what can be thought to be true of God literally and what  can only be thought to be true of God metaphorically.  5.6 Love in God (1a,20)  We read in the New Testament that God is love (1 John 4:16), and we will,  therefore, not expect Aquinas, the teacher of sacra doctrina, to deny that there  is love in God. Readers should not, however, think of 1a,20 as Aquinas’s #nal  word on the love of God in the Summa. Rather, they should read 1a,20 as an  introduction to the notion of God as loving, one that sets the scene for what 

Aquinas goes on to say about the love of God. And what are the main points  that Aquinas wants to emphasize in this introduction? There are #ve of them.  First, Aquinas argues (1a,20,1) that there is love in God since there is will in  God and since will is a matter of desire (or love). Here Aquinas is ascribing  love to God as belonging to what God is by nature. He is not o"ering an argument for God loving based on what God has brought about (us being happy,  for example). You might conclude that Fred and Mary love their children because of what they do for them, but Aquinas is not thinking along these lines  in 1a,20,1. Here his point is that God, whom he takes not to have to produce  anything, can be thought to love just because God can and must delight in the  goodness that is God.  Yet Aquinas goes on to argue that God can be thought to love even what is  not divine. This is so, Aquinas thinks, because to love something can be  thought of as willing good for it and because God wills good to every creature  in that everything that exists is somehow good (remember what I have previously said about Aquinas’s view that being and goodness are interconnected  notions). In willing the existence of what is not divine, God is willing good to  all that is not divine and, therefore, loves it by being the cause of its existence  (1a,20,2). Aquinas goes on to argue (1a,20,3 and 4) that this conclusion does  not entail that God loves all things equally. For Aquinas, there are degrees of  goodness when it comes to creatures, and God must, therefore, be thought to  love some things more than others just by bringing it about (willing) that  some things are better than others.15 