# Summary


4.1 Space 4.1.1 Does physics capture all there is to space? It is in the study of space, time, and motion that modern physics, in the work of Galileo and Newton, had its most impressive early successes – and, in the work of Einstein, one of its two most profound recent successes. Could there be anything more to space, time, and motion than what physics reveals? Could the Aristotelian still have anything to say on these subjects? Yes, and yes. Let’s begin with space. In chapter 3, we examined the view of Bertrand Russell that our knowledge of the physical world external to the mind is knowledge only of abstract structural relations rather than of the intrinsic nature of the concrete entities that bear those relations. We also saw that Russell and those influenced by him ended up having to qualify this position considerably, in light of an objection raised by M. H. A. Newman. If we think that the content of physics is exhausted by what it captures in the language of mathematics, then we cannot avoid the conclusion that there must be more to the natural world than is described by physics. Galen Strawson (2008, pp. 29-33) takes the nature of space to be a specific example of something that outstrips what can be captured in the purely structural description Russell and other structural realists think physics affords us. If you hold up your hands and take note of the spatial extension between them, says Strawson, what you grasp is something more than what he calls the mere “abstract dimensionality” or “abstract metric” conveyed by a mathematical representation. For such a representation “won't distinguish space from any other possible three-dimensional ‘space’, e.g. the emotional state-space of a species that have just three emotions, love, anger, and despair” (2008, p. 31). Or, to borrow an example given by Craig Bourne in a different context: [J]ust because something is represented spatially, we cannot draw the conclusion that it is a spatial dimension or that it is in anyway [sic] analogous to a spatial dimension. For consider… a three-dimensional colour space which illustrates the possible ways in which things can match in colour… [I]t would be misconceived to draw the conclusion that brightness, hue, and saturation were each spatial dimensions, just because they were represented spatially. (2006, p. 158) Neither “emotional state-space” nor “three-dimensional color space” is literally space, even if at some very abstract level of description their dimensions are analogous to those of space. Since only what is common to both literal space and these other “spaces” is captured by a purely mathematical representation, there is more to the nature of space than what such a representation conveys. Can we say exactly what that is? Beyond noting that extension is at the core of our concept of space, Strawson says little more than that “in the present context I am inclined just to hold up my hands again” (2008, p. 31). Now, we can in fact say more than that, and will do so presently. But it is worth emphasizing that even if we could not, that wouldn’t cast doubt on Strawson’s point. For one thing, the difference between literal space and the “spaces” just referred to suffices to show that there must be more to space than abstract dimensionality, whether or not we can say what it is. For another, recall from chapter 2 that some of what we know is of a tacit and embodied nature. We “know how” to move through space, to reach into space, to avoid things coming toward us through space, etc. whether or not we “know that” space has such-and-such a nature. There must be facts about space in virtue of which it is possible for us to have such capacities or “know how,” whether or not we can explicitly represent those facts. To be sure (and as Strawson notes) even the notion of extension illustrated by the space between one’s hands is abstract insofar as it outstrips any particular experience. That is why we can acquire the same one concept of space through either sight or touch. The point is that the concept is nevertheless not as abstract as that of mere dimensionality. Yet might we not take an eliminativist line and simply jettison this less abstract, commonsense concept of space in favor of the more abstract one expressible in purely mathematical language? No, we may not, because we will in that case be left with a mere abstraction rather than a concrete reality of any sort. We will thereby have eliminated the natural world itself, and not merely some feature that common sense attributes to it. In that case, we will no longer be doing empirical science, but instead some a priori ersatz. (To be sure, we saw in chapter 3 that Ladyman and Ross advocate an interpretation of science that blurs the distinction between the abstract and the concrete, but we also saw that this position is incoherent.) In particular, we will not have captured concrete physical space any more than the “emotional state-space” of Strawson’s example captures emotion, or the “three-dimensional color space” of Bourne’s example captures color – or, to borrow some examples from the end of the previous chapter, any more than the abstract concept triangularity captures the nature of a pyramid, or the aircraft engineer’s calculations capture the nature of airline passengers. As John Campbell writes: We can distinguish between a pure geometry, which is a purely formal exercise in mathematical computation, and an applied geometry, which is a body of doctrine about the world in which we live. What turns one into the other is the assignation of some physical meaning to the spatial concepts, for example, the identification of a straight line as the path of a light ray in vacuo… It is only its figuring in an intuitive physics of one's environment, through regularities connecting spatial properties with other physical properties, that makes [spatial reasoning] reasoning that is not purely mathematical but rather about the space in which one lives. (1994, p. 25) As Campbell goes on to argue, the “other physical properties” to which spatial properties are crucially connected include the causal properties we attribute to physical objects (pp. 26-29). The notion of a world of physical objects entails a distinction between causal factors internal to such objects and causal factors external to them. For both factors play a role in determining what happens within such a world. Why did a certain glass break when struck? Part of the answer concerns the brittleness of the glass, and part of it concerns the solidity and force of the object that struck it. Had the glass been less brittle, then it would not have broken even if the solidity and force of the other object remained the same. If the solidity or force of the other object were much less great, the glass would not have shattered even if it were just as brittle. Now, these causal relationships, Campbell says, “give physical meaning to spatial connectedness” and “physical significance to the metric for the space within our intuitive physics” (p. 28). Suppose the notion of a world of physical objects and the notion of spatial extension do indeed go hand in hand. (Cf. P. F. Strawson 1959, Chapter 1.) Might we nevertheless be able to make sense of a world that has neither physical objects nor spatial extension yet is still objective or mind-independent? A famous thought experiment from P. F. Strawson (not to be confused with his son Galen Strawson) might seem to show that this is possible. Strawson proposed that there could, in principle, be a world of objective but non-spatiotemporal particulars all of which were sounds (1959, chapter 2). The idea is that there might be criteria which, by reference to pitch alone, would allow for the re-identification of a sound when it is not heard and for distinguishing between sounds which are numerically identical and not merely qualitatively identical. Now, whether this is in fact possible even in principle is far from clear. Richard Gale identifies a number of problems with Strawson’s proposal (1991, pp. 329-40), such as the fact that on a closer analysis, causal criteria seem necessary in order to identify and distinguish sounds. For example, consider a musician who begins to play a note on one instrument just before another musician playing the same sort of instrument stops playing the same note. To someone who can only hear and not see the two musicians, it might seem that it is one continuous note being played, whereas someone who can see what is going on will know that it is really two different notes that are overlapping. Only our knowledge of the physical causes of the notes allows us to determine which scenario is correct. Similarly, arguably we are able to distinguish the notes we hear in a chord only because we know that they have different causes. Even if Strawson is right, however, that would not help our imagined eliminativist. For one thing, no one would claim that our world is a purely auditory world of the sort described by Strawson. It is instead a world of rocks, trees, animals, stars, molecules, atoms, and other physical objects, which, unlike the sounds described by Strawson, would have to exist in spatial relationships to one another. For another thing, even Strawson’s world of sounds is a world of particular things, and thus would contain more than the abstract dimensionality or metric our eliminativist would want to make do with. 

4.1.2 Abstract not absolute The results of the argument so far are summed up by Andrew van Melsen as follows: Scientific language… schematizes both object and place. The place of a body in science is usually indicated as the place of a point in a system of coordinates. Science has, of course, a very good reason for using such a concept of place, but it is clear that what science is describing is not the real place, but only a schematized one. The real place has extension since the object of which it is the place is extended, too. (1954, p. 164) Galen Strawson, as we’ve seen, also takes extension to be an essential aspect of space that the merely schematic and metrical notion of physics fails to capture. Now, common sense and Aristotelian philosophy of nature alike would add that the concept of space is that of extension considered specifically as a kind of receptacle for physical objects, insofar as such objects are contained and move about within space (Bittle 1941, pp. 155-56; McWilliams 1950, p. 101). This container or receptacle is not to be confused with a void or strict nothingness. To be sure, some Aristotelians think a void is possible at least in theory (Phillips 1950, pp. 93-96), though others doubt this (McInerny 2001, pp. 192-3). Certainly the notion is highly problematic. If there were a void between two purportedly spatially separated material objects, why would they be separated? A void is nothingness, so that there would in this case be nothing between them and thus nothing to separate them. Hence they should be in contact. Phillips responds that what would keep the two objects apart is not any sort of matter between them, but just the fact that they are at different positions in space. But this seems to miss the point. For if space were strictly a void or nothingness, then there wouldn’t be anything there in the first place in which there are different positions to occupy. There are further problems. Barry Dainton (2010, pp. 147-48) argues that if space were a void, there would be nothing to restrict us to movement in only three dimensions. But we are so restricted. Furthermore, Dainton argues, if there were a void between two material objects, there would be literally nothing to connect them, in which case they would each constitute a self-contained world that could have no influence on the other (pp. 149-51). Whether or not a void is ultimately possible in theory, though, the notion of space as a receptacle does not identify the space of the actual world with a void. The idea of space as a kind of receptacle or container can be elucidated by noting what it rules out, such as the views of Descartes and Leibniz. (Cf. Bittle 1941, p. 152.) If space is what contains extended physical substance, then (contra Descartes) it cannot be identified with extended physical substance itself. Space qua container can either be filled or empty in a way a physical substance itself cannot be. Neither, in that case (and contra Leibniz), can space be identified with relations between physical objects. For if space qua container can be empty of physical objects, then it can exist in the absence of such relations (since in empty space there would be nothing to serve as relata, and – as I argued in chapter 3 – there can be no relations without relata). Nor can a relationalist view plausibly account for the boundaries of space. E. J. Lowe asks us to consider a universe in which the only physical objects are three particles arranged in the form of an equilateral triangle (2002, p. 265). On a relationalist view there would presumably be space within the boundaries of the triangle. But would space extend beyond those boundaries? If not, why not? And if so, how far would it extend, and why that far exactly? There do not seem to be any facts about the particles themselves that could justify any particular answers to these questions. Lowe suggests that a relationalist may respond by holding that the boundaries of space in such a case are determined by where it is possible for a particle to be relative to the center of the triangle, where what is possible is in turn determined by the laws of nature that govern the universe (2002, p. 266). (In a somewhat different way, Nick Huggett (2010, pp. 98-100) also appeals to laws of nature to defend relationalism.) But without further elaboration, this seems to be an attempt to solve the problem by sheer stipulation. What does the claim that the laws of nature determine this amount to? Should we interpret it in terms of a theological view of laws, viz. as the claim that God has simply laid it down that the boundaries of space will extend thus far? The trouble with this suggestion is that even God cannot make just any old thing a law of nature. For example, even God could not establish a law of nature according to which squares are round. What laws are possible is constrained by what is possible for the things governed by the laws, given their nature. So, God could establish a law determining that space will have such-and-such boundaries only if the nature of space allows for such a limitation. But whether space, as the relationalist conceives of it, does in fact allow for such a limitation is precisely what the relationalist was supposed to be explaining. So an appeal to laws of nature construed as divine decrees wouldn’t solve the problem at all. Should we appeal instead to an Aristotelian view of laws, according to which a law of nature is a summary of how a thing can behave given its nature or essence? On this proposal, the idea would be that it is simply in the nature of the particles in our imagined universe that it is possible for them to be in some places relative to the center of the triangle, and not in others. But the problem with this should be obvious. The critic of relationalism, remember, objected that there seemed to be nothing about the natures of physical objects that could determine the boundaries of space. That is why the relationalist was appealing to laws of nature in the first place, as a further factor, additional to the natures of the objects, that could account for the boundaries. If laws of nature themselves are now to be explained in terms of the natures of physical objects, then we are back where we started. We will be implicitly appealing after all to the natures of physical objects in order to account for the boundaries of space, when the whole point was supposed to be to avoid having to do so given that there seems to be nothing in the nature of physical objects that could account for this. But doesn’t Einstein’s general theory of relativity favor the relationalist position? As Lowe points out, that is not necessarily the case (2002, pp. 266-67). While Newton’s absolutism was indeed Einstein’s target, Lowe suggests that it is really Newton’s conception of material objects, rather than the absolute space in which he located them, that is incompatible with general relativity. For Einstein’s theory can be interpreted as regarding material objects as local deformations in the fabric of space-time, thereby making of matter “a purely geometrical feature of space itself” (p. 267). On this interpretation, space is as absolute as it is on Newton’s account, and it is only Newton’s supposition that material objects are distinct from space that is rejected by general relativity. Be that as it may (and we will come back to Einstein before long), the Aristotelian is by no means committed to a Newtonian absolutist conception of space. To be sure, Aristotelian philosophy of nature regards space as real. It is not, in other words, merely ideal (in Kant’s sense of the term), viz. a sheer artifact of the human mind with no foundation in objective reality. So to treat it would be incompatible with the realism about physical objects defended in chapter 2 and the scientific realism defended in chapter 3. If physical entities of the ordinary and/or theoretical sort are real and causally related to one another, and the existence of these entities and their causal relations presupposes the existence of space, then space must be real. It would be an error, however, to suppose that if one rejects both the relationalist and idealist conceptions of space, then the only remaining option is something like a Newtonian absolutist conception. The Aristotelian position purports to be a further alternative, and it is best understood on analogy with the Aristotelian realist approach to the problem of universals. Take, for example, humanness. There is the humanness of Socrates, the humanness of Plato, the humanness of Donald Trump, and so on. The mind abstracts humanness qua universal out from these particular instances, disentangling it, as it were, from the individualizing features with which it is mixed in Socrates, Plato, Trump, et al. Now, contrary to nominalism, this is not sheer invention. There really is something in mind-independent reality that the mind gets hold of when it abstracts humanness out from the individuals. But contrary to Platonic realism, humanness qua universal does not exist outside the mind, in some “third realm.” There is the humanness of Socrates, the humanness of Plato, the humanness of Trump, et al., and there is the universal humanness that the mind entertains when it notes what is common to these individuals, but there is no further thing over and above these. Abstract entities like humanness exist only as abstracted by the mind from concrete particulars, not in some independent way. Space qua extended receptacle or container is like that. In concrete reality outside the mind, the receptacle is always filled with material objects, just as humanness exists in concrete mind-independent reality only in actual particular human beings. Space qua extended receptacle is nevertheless real and distinct from material objects and their relations, just as humanness qua universal is real and distinct from particular human beings like Socrates, Plato, and Trump. But all the same, space qua extended receptacle does not exist in some third kind of way, entirely apart from either material objects or the mind, just as humanness qua universal does not exist in some third, Platonic kind of way independent of both concrete particulars and the abstracting mind. From the Aristotelian point of view, the absolutist view of space Platonizes space in something like the way Platonic realism Platonizes universals. Now, this absolutist or “Platonizing” view of space cannot be right. (Cf. Bittle 1941, pp. 150-52; Koren 1962, pp. 108-9; Phillips 1950, pp. 82-85.) If space qua extended receptacle existed in the way absolutism supposes, then it would be either a substance or an attribute, and it cannot be either. For suppose it is a substance. In that case it is either a material substance, or an immaterial one. If it is immaterial, then it cannot have any extended parts. But of course, any region of space does have extended parts, namely the smaller regions of space within it. So it cannot be an immaterial substance. If it is a material substance, though, then precisely because it is a material substance it will require an extended receptacle to contain it. And yet space was itself supposed to be the extended receptacle that contained material substances! So to think of it as a material substance is simply a category mistake. Moreover, if we do say that it is a material substance, we will be led into a vicious regress. For in that case it will, again, require an extended receptacle of its own to contain it. But that extended receptacle or high-order space will for the same reason require a further extended receptacle to contain it, and so on ad infinitum. So, space cannot be a material substance any more than it can be an immaterial one. But neither can it be an attribute. For it would be an extended attribute and thus presuppose an extended substance, which would land us again in the difficulties just described. It is telling that even Newton’s conception of space is less absolutist than it might at first appear, insofar as he identified space with God’s sensorium. This essentially makes of it a divine attribute. Theologically this is problematic insofar as it is hard to see how it can avoid collapsing into pantheism, and pantheism cannot be correct, for several reasons. For example, God is absolutely simple or without parts, so that all his attributes are ultimately one and the same thing looked at from different points of view. But space, and the world generally, has parts. Hence God cannot be identified with the world in general or space in particular. (Cf. Feser 2017.) The point for present purposes, though, is just to note how difficult it is consistently to treat space as absolute. As Adrian Bardon notes (2013, p. 53), Newton’s absolutist view of space (and of time and motion) was motivated by his model of scientific explanation as a matter of identifying universal laws of nature. Newton’s laws account for changes of motion in terms of force, and mere relative motions do not require force for their explanation. Hence the need in his system for absolute motion, which entailed a need for absolute space and time. (Cf. Weatherall 2016, pp. 32-33) Now, as we saw in chapter 3, for neo-Aristotelians like Cartwright, laws of nature are not universal, and they are not ontologically fundamental. What are fundamental are the natures and capacities of things, and laws describe how a thing will behave given its nature and capacities, not necessarily universally but under certain conditions. Natures and capacities (and thus laws, rightly understood) are immanent to things rather than standing above and apart from them like Platonic forms or divine decrees. And for the Aristotelian, space too, though real rather than ideal, is immanent to the world of material things rather than being either a quasi-Platonic entity or a divine attribute. (It is worth adding that Newton’s view of laws, like his view of space, tends toward pantheism, or at least occasionalism. For if a law is essentially a divine decree and physical objects have no immanent capacities or powers, then it seems that it is really God rather than physical objects who is doing everything in the natural world.) 4.1.3 The continuum Common sense takes some of the objects that occupy space to be made of discrete parts and others to be continuous or uninterrupted. For example, a stack of wooden blocks is made of discrete parts, whereas a single block is continuous. Common sense also takes objects of the continuous sort to be the more fundamental kind, insofar as non-continuous objects have continuous ones as their parts. However, upon reflection it might seem that even continuous objects must really be made up of parts. After all, a single wooden block can be divided in half, those halves can be divided themselves, and so on. Hence, it might be concluded, though some objects appear to be continuous, this is an illusion. But a number of traditional arguments show that this cannot be right, and that common sense is correct. (Cf. Hugon 2013, pp. 240-47; Phillips 1950, Chapter V.) For the parts of which a continuous object is purportedly composed would be either extended or unextended, and either supposition leads to absurdity. Suppose first that the parts are unextended. These unextended parts are either at a distance from each other or they are not. If they are at a distance from one another, then they would not form a continuum, but would rather be a series of discrete things (like the dots in a dotted line, only without even the minute extension such dots have). Suppose then that they are not at a distance from one another, but are instead in contact. Then, since they have no extension at all and thus lack any extremes or middle parts, they will exactly coincide with one another (like a single dot, only once again without even the minute extension of such a dot). All these parts together, no matter how many of them there are, will be as unextended as an individual part. In that case too, then, they will not form a true continuum. So, if a continuous object is made up of parts, they will have to be extended parts. Now these purported extended parts would either be finite in number or infinite. They cannot be finite, however, because anything extended, no matter how small, can always be divided at least in principle into yet smaller extended parts, and those parts into yet smaller extended parts ad infinitum. So if a continuous object is made up of extended parts, they will have to be infinite in number. But the more extended parts a thing has, however minute those parts, the larger it is. Hence if a continuous object is made up of an infinite number of extended parts, it will be of infinite size. This will be so of every continuous object, however small it might seem. For example, it would follow that the single wooden block of our example is infinite in size. But this is absurd. Hence a continuous object can no more be made up of extended parts than it can be made up of unextended parts. Arguments of this sort trace back to Zeno’s paradox of parts, which we briefly considered in chapter 1. Some of Zeno’s other paradoxes reinforce the point. Hence consider the dichotomy paradox, in which a runner tries to get from point A to point B. To get to B, the runner first has to get to the midpoint between A and B. But to get to that point, he first has to get to the quarter point between A and the midpoint, and so on ad infinitum. Now, since the continuum between A and B is infinitely divisible, if that continuum is made up of extended parts then there will be an actually infinite number of distances the runner will have to traverse in order to get from A to B. Indeed, there will be an actually infinite number of distances he will have to traverse even to get his foot off the ground. Hence he will be unable to get to B, and indeed unable even to get started. Now, Zeno, of course, drew skeptical conclusions from his paradoxes. The paradox of parts was intended to show that there are no distinct objects, and the dichotomy paradox to show that there is no such thing as motion. But the Aristotelian draws a different conclusion. Applying the theory of actuality and potentiality, he argues that what the paradoxes really show is that the parts of a continuum are in it only potentially rather than actually. That is not to say that they are not there at all. A potentiality is not nothing, but rather a kind of reality. That is why a wooden block (for example) is divisible despite being continuous or uninterrupted in a way of stack of blocks is not. But until it is actually divided, the parts are not actual. If they were, the Aristotelian argues, then we’d be left with Zeno’s bizarre consequences. Extended objects would all be infinitely big, runners would be unable to move, and so on. Affirming that reality includes both potentialities as well as actualities allows us to acknowledge the reality of the parts of a continuum while at the same time avoiding paradox. The Aristotelian point is sometimes misunderstood. For example, David Foster Wallace claims that when Aristotle held that the subintervals between A and B are potentially infinite, what he had in mind was comparable to the way a measurement can always potentially be made more precise (2010, pp. 66-67). For instance, for practical purposes, we might say that a certain child’s height is 38.5 inches, but if we wanted to we could state it more precisely as 38.53 inches, or even more precisely still by taking the measurement to further decimal places ad infinitum. Nevertheless, any actual measurement will only be taken to some finite number of decimal places. Similarly, Aristotle’s point (so Wallace seems to think) is that though we could potentially identify ever smaller units within an interval ad infinitum, we will in actuality only ever identify some finite number of units. But that is not the Aristotelian’s point, or not the main point anyway. The claim is not fundamentally about what we might do by way of identifying parts of a continuum, but rather about what is there in the continuum itself. Wallace’s way of stating the idea appears to leave it open that a continuum might have an actually infinite number of parts, even if we will in practice never be able to pick them all out. But in fact the Aristotelian’s claim is that the parts are not actually there to pick out in the first place, but only potentially there. However, even critics who correctly understand the Aristotelian position sometimes suggest that the appeal to the theory of actuality and potentiality is not necessary in order to resolve Zeno’s paradoxes. We can, it is supposed, simply apply modern mathematics instead (Russell 1963, pp. 63-64). For example, calculus tells us that a convergent infinite series can sum to 1. Hence, the argument goes, there is no difficulty in understanding how the runner in the dichotomy paradox can traverse the finite distance between A and B despite there being an infinite number of ever smaller distances between them. But as even many philosophers with no Aristotelian ax to grind have noted, there are several problems with such claims. First, while a convergent infinite series like the one at issue here has a limiting value of 1, it does not follow that it has a sum of 1 in the ordinary sense of the word “sum” (Black 2001, p. 70; Ray 1991, p. 13). As Barry Dainton notes: In defining the sum of an infinite series in terms of its limit, mathematicians are really introducing a new stipulation as to how the term “sum” can be used in a new context: that of infinite – as opposed to finite – series of numbers. (2010, p. 275, emphasis added) Now, if the question raised by Zeno’s dichotomy paradox is how the traversal of an infinite number of ever smaller distances between A and B can amount to the traversal of the distance between A and B itself, it is no answer simply to stipulate that we will count the former as amounting to the latter (Bardon 2013, p. 16; Salmon 2001, p. 29). But that is what the appeal to calculus essentially does. It merely tries to define the problem away. As Wallace wryly observes, this is a “deeply trivial” solution, “along the lines of ‘Because it’s illegal’ as an answer to ‘Why is it wrong to kill?’” (2010, pp. 51-52). Second, even if we do count the limiting value as a sum in the ordinary sense, that still does not solve Zeno’s problem. For this still only gives us a mathematical abstraction, and what we need to know is why we should take that abstraction to tell us anything about concrete physical reality (Mazur 2008, pp. 7-8; Ray 1991, pp. 13-14; Salmon 2001, pp. 33-34). Aristotle’s solution, by contrast, is precisely an attempt to tell us what it is about concrete reality itself – namely, the fact that concrete reality includes potentialities as well as actualities, and that the parts of a continuum are present only as potentialities – that blocks Zeno’s conclusion. Third, calculus essentially gives us a solution to a practical problem, whereas what paradoxes like Zeno’s raise is a metaphysical problem. Given that an object really does get from A to B, calculus gives us a way to describe this motion mathematically, and we can go on to deploy this description for practical and scientific purposes. But Zeno is not concerned with the practical needs of everyday life and with science. What he wants to know is what it is about objective reality that could make it the case that an object gets from A to B. Merely noting that an object does in fact get to B and then going from there does not answer this question. As J. B. Kennedy writes, “Newton’s calculus simply assumes that the series does add to one exactly… The calculus did not solve, but rather suppressed, Zeno’s paradoxes” (2003, p. 125, emphasis added). In short, the appeal to calculus simply changes the subject. Other potential objections to the Aristotelian positon grounded in modern mathematics similarly miss the point. For example, as Dainton points out, it is now the “standard view” that space is composed of dimensionless points, and this view exhibits a “consilience with the mathematical methods deployed with such spectacular success by physicists and engineers over the past few centuries” (2010, p. 301; Cf. Grünbaum 2001, p. 166). This success might be thought to tell against the Aristotelian view, defended above, that the continuum cannot be made up of unextended parts. As with the appeal to calculus, however, the practical utility of a mathematical model simply does not by itself resolve metaphysical problems of the sort that motivate the Aristotelian position. Indeed, as Dainton goes on to point out, many philosophers and scientists – he cites Poincaré, Gödel, Weyl, Brentano, and Peirce as examples – reject the claim that the standard view resolves the metaphysical questions, precisely because it raises problems like the ones cited by the Aristotelian. Dainton writes: Mathematicians may have worked out fruitful ways of assigning magnitudes to infinite collections of abstract entities, but this is of limited relevance to the real problem posed by Zeno. For it remains very difficult to comprehend how a concrete material thing could be entirely composed of dimensionless parts. (2010, p. 303. Emphasis added.) Now, the Aristotelian position is concerned precisely to address what must be true of concrete material reality in order for Zeno’s paradoxes to be rebutted. No mere mathematical result can substitute for such an account, even if it might supplement it.