# Solar power project

Solar power project

Now that we’re between frozen precip events, I thought I’d show you a project I finished recently, in the interest of sharing some experience about DIY solar power generation and storage. Given events in MN and elsewhere, I’ve been thinking about the communities I’m a part of and how we can leverage those for mutual protection, information, and benefit. So without belaboring that point, here’s briefly what I did:

These are three bifacial solar panels rated at 400 watts each, 1200 watts nominal total. They feed a charger/inverter unit in the garage, which feeds a large 48v battery with a 5.3 kWh capacity. That DC power then goes back to the inverter unit, from which it feeds up to six critical AC circuits in the house. This is an off-grid system that does not attach to the grid and works when the grid goes down, or even while it’s up in my case. I did a lot of online research via YouTube and elsewhere.

So far, so good, the whole thing works really well; We didn’t have to use it last weekend, so I’m testing it again today to verify how long I can run certain circuits separately or combined. Today it will run up to 1000 watts for the sunniest 2 or 3 hours and taper off from there. So it will fill up the battery most likely. In the spring it will exceed 1200 watts.
If I were to change anything, it would be to add another battery for twice the storage, because although I can run the fridge for a couple days on this system, I have to hope the sun shines after a day and a half or so. The problem is that these batteries are just under $1000 these days, so it’s an investment not to take lightly for many of us. I could also integrate a small generator into this setup and may eventually do that. 

So if you are contemplating a similar backup solution, be advised that panels are cheap, inverters and other gear are more expensive, and batteries are the biggest financial challenge. Let me know what else you might want to know. 

Dylan Ellerbee I used the manual transfer switch on the left. It allows you to toggle the source of power for selected circuits from the preexisting subpanel (right) to the solar or generator backup and back again, independently of each other. It’s UL listed.
We already had some 2”pvc conduit buried between house and garage so I ran new 10 gauge AC cable through that. It was underground rated grey sealed cable which was overkill but finding water in the conduit made me nervous.

Diane Rodelli the panels on the house are grid-tied without local storage. They supply about 90% of our usage over the year and our bill is about $14 or so a month base service fee. Duke credits us for feeding the grid at a 1:1 rate which is good. When the grid goes down, our roof panel grid-tied system also does not work. This is to protect line workers of course. Batteries for that whole-house system are expensive-like 8 to 10 K. So I opted for this separate system I could diy.
One of the circuits in the house the backup system can connect to (using a transfer switch) is the blower motor on the furnace. I’m actually running that today along with the fridge and Internet, off the backup solar. I have an app that tells me graphically how much I’m generating and using, etc. I could NOT run the a/c off this system b/c I’m limited to 120v not 240. That would be possible but I’d have to buy another inverter and more batteries.

Michael Shiflett in general you can use either a 12v, 24 v, or 48 v system. 12 v works really well for some RV apps and is the safest. I considered a 24 v system, also good, but the physical arrangement of the panels meant that I would end up with three in series, which adds the panel voltages. In this case it was three panels at about 35 v which yields around 105 volts at about 12 amps. Those numbers dictated for me the kind of inverter I got. The 24v and certainly 12v inverters had voltage ranges that were too low for the combined panel voltage in my case. There are good reasons to wire some panels in series and some in parallel, but I only have one series string.

As a follow-up , this is a screenshot of the app that tracks production and consumption. The yellow background is production today; you can see it peaks just above 1000W and heads back down, dipping where the sun goes behind some bare branches. The blue and purple are consumption. The low blue bar is our modem and my pc, just idling with some sporadic use. The variable spikes at 200-250 watts are the refrigerator cycling on and off (180W) added to that. The spikes at 1000W are the furnace blower motor cycling on and off. The high spike is me toasting an English muffin in the.toaster oven at around 2000W. So for these three circuits in midday (fridge/toaster, heater, Internet and pc) I’m generating enough to replace what I’m using. But in cloudy skies or after peak sun, I will start to lose ground, which makes storage really important.