# Dear kevin,


Things have been good.

1. Pre-covid I had a 2 year old and a job / marriage / social life
2. Post-covid / i have a 7 year old who’s energetic sensitive bright and trusting and demands so much of me.  My social life has shifted - as if over the last 5 years I’ve aged out of the peer groups that are out.  And I don’t want to be away from my daughter anyhow.  The anthroposophy stuff is dissolved, but I have a neighbor who I can talk philosophy, politics, and hermeticism wiht so that is good.  I meet with a friend to play guitar, and I learn the harmony parts on violin to small Suzuki pieces to play with my daughter.  And try to be ok that my wife and I spend our free time talking checklists rather than fun.
3. I do a little writing in the mornings, I have this idea of a person meeting a tree and contemplating it.  The contemplation is my way of working out Aquinas.  Reading on hylomorphism has taken the place of hermeticism on many levels.  
4. I was thinking of you recently.  I took on a full time job as a software developer 7 years ago.  I’d never done that sort of work before.  It’s very much like essay writing in a very restrained, limited language where there’s less room for ambiguity.  On some level, that’s been a good discipline for me. 
5. The new thing is AI, and so what’s encouraged is this thing called AI-first engineer, which amounts to a sort of augmented writing.  Lately, i talked to my dad about transgenderism, and he wondered if that issue is related to technological advancement, and I said definitely.  Since he’s a sports fan, I suggested that in 20 years, players might have augmented body parts. There might be rules around how many such players could be had, and the degree of augmentation allowed.  Teams would have sponsors - robotics company that used the sports platform as a means of competing and advertising and energizing their stock value.   And of course there would be scandals.  And further pushing of the envelope.  Inevitably, robotics would be overtaken by genetic modification.  I remember only 15 years ago, you described a scenario where such (state-sponsored?) superheros would live and fight publicly among us, this being the first heartbeats of the war of all against all.  Was that notion turned into an essay?
6. I’ve always struggled with fatigue issues - of the sort that there are days when i can’t get out, or half days that are a wash due to a need to rest, so juggling that with work and family, and the small attempts at art & friendship is tricky.  But I think this is the story of our age group.  
